h1. Play Scala — (beta)

Welcome to the Play Scala documentation. This documentation is intended for the **0.9 release** of the Scala module and may significantly differs from previous versions. 

p(note). This version is still in beta but can already be used to create complete Play applications using Scala as main language. Most of the API is stabilized and future versions will just improve compatibility with the existing Play features.
 
This version is intented to be used with **Play 1.2**; for now you can download a "preview release of Play 1.2":#.

h2. Getting started

Add Scala support to your existing Play installation.

# "Installing Scala support for Play":install
# "‘Hello World’ tutorial — Your first Play Scala application":hello-world
# "Learning Scala with Play":learnscala

h2. ‘Play Scala’ for Play Java developers

The Scala version of Play framework share the same philosophy and concepts than the Java version. Here are listed the most important changes.

# "Writing Play controllers in Scala":controllers
# "HTTP to Scala data binding":dataBinding
# "Dealing with Scala types in Play templates":#
# "Database access options":#
# "Testing your application":#

h2. Manual

Play Scala specific features deeply explained.

# "SQL data access with Play Scala":#
## "Overview":#
## "The Stream API":#
## "ResultSet as a dictionnary":#
## "Using Pattern Matching":#
## "The Parser combinator API":#
## "Adding some Magic":#
## "Object relational mapping":#

h2. Tutorial — Play Scala guide, a real world app step-by-step

Here is the Scala version of the well known **‘Yet Another Blog Engine’** Play tutorial.

# "Starting up the project":#
# "A first iteration of the data model":#
# "Building the first screen":#
# "The comments page":#
# "Setting up a Captcha":#
# (to be continued)