h1. Dealing with Scala types in Play templates

By default, Play Scala uses the same templating engine than Java. However the Scala plugin automatically enhances it to support natively some Scala specific features.

h2. Boolean operations on @Option@ and @Seq@ types

You can safely use @Option@ and @Seq@ types in every boolean operations:

# A @None@ value is evaluated as @false@
# A @Some@ value is evaluated as @true@
# An empty @Seq@ is evaluated as @false@
# A non empty @Seq@ is evaluated as @true@

So this example:

bc. def index = {
    Template(
        'user -> Some("Guillaume"),
        'email -> None,
        'phones -> List("06xxxxx", "09xxxxx")
    )
}
 
---- index.html
 
<h1>${user ?: 'Guest'}</h1>
 
<p>
#{if email}
    Email: <a href="mailto:${email}">${email}</a>
#{/}
#{else}
    (no email specified)
#{/}
</p>
 
<ul>
#{list phones}
    <li>${_}</li>
#{/}
</ul>
#{else}
    <p>(empty phones list)</p>
#{/}

Will render as:

bc. <h1>Guillaume</h1>
 
<p>
    (no email specified)
</p>
 
<ul>
    <li>06xxxxx</li>
    <li>09xxxxx</li>
</ul>

h2. Safe navigation for @Option@ types

When you need to navigate more deeply into members contained in an @Option@ type, you can use the @?.@ operator to automatically unwrap @Some@ values and ignore @None@ values.

For example, here the @user@ variable reference an @Option[User]@ type:

bc. ${user?.name?.toUpperCase()}

If the @user@ variable contains a @None@ value, no error will be thrown and an empty string will be displayed.

Also, when you display an @Option@ value using an expression (like @${user}@), the contained value is displayed, or an empty string if the value is @None@.

h2. Litteral access to elements of a @Seq@

You can use the litteral way to access any value from of Scala @Seq@ in a template:

bc. def index = Template('items -> List(1,2,3))
 
---- index.html
 
<h1>${items[1]}</h1>